[jules] single TPU tutorial / setup (#1341)
marin-community/marin: docs/tutorials/marin-on-single-tpu.md

# Running Marin on a Single TPU Node (e.g., v4-8 using Levanter)

> Welcome to this guide on setting up and running Marin experiments on a single Google Cloud TPU node (like a v4-8)! This tutorial is the TPU equivalent of our "Setting up a Local GPU Environment" guide. Here, we'll focus on leveraging Levanter's `launch.py` script to configure the TPU environment and execute your Marin tasks. This guide will walk you through the necessary prerequisites, configuration, and common commands to get you started.

Author: ```suggestion
Welcome to this guide on setting up and running Marin experiments on a single Google Cloud TPU node (like a v4-8)! This tutorial is the TPU equivalent of our "Setting up a Local GPU Environment" guide. Here, we'll focus on leveraging [Levanter's `launch.py`](https://levanter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Getting-Started-TPU-VM/#using-launchpy) script to configure the TPU environment and execute your Marin tasks. 

This guide will walk you through the necessary prerequisites, configuration, and common commands to get you started.
```

# Prerequisites

## Levanter Installation

> Marin uses Levanter for its core functionalities, especially for TPU interaction via `launch.py`. It's assumed that Levanter is cloned into `submodules/levanter` relative to your Marin project root.

Author: ```suggestion
Marin uses Levanter for its core functionality, especially for TPU interaction via `launch.py`.
```

1.  **Clone Levanter (if not already present):**
    If you haven't cloned Levanter into the `submodules/` directory yet, you can do so using:
    ```bash
    # From the root of your Marin project directory

>     git clone https://github.com/stanford-crfm/levanter.git submodules/levanter

Author: ```suggestion
    mkdir -p submodules
    git clone https://github.com/stanford-crfm/levanter.git submodules/levanter
```

    ```

>     If you previously used `git submodule` for Levanter and wish to switch to this direct clone method, ensure the old submodule is removed first (e.g., `git submodule deinit submodules/levanter` and remove the entry from `.gitmodules`).

Author: ```suggestion
```

    cd ../.. # Return to Marin project root
    ```

## Docker Installation

Docker is required for using `launch.py` to manage TPU resources. `launch.py` will build a Docker image containing your Levanter code and deploy it to the TPU.

*   **Install Docker:** Follow the official Docker installation guide for your operating system: [https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/)

## Weights & Biases (WandB) Account and Credentials

Marin uses Weights & Biases (WandB) for logging experiment metrics, results, and general run information. You'll need a WandB account to track your experiments.

*   **Create a WandB Account:** If you don't have one, sign up at [https://wandb.ai/](https://wandb.ai/).
*   **Obtain Credentials:** Once you have an account, you'll need three pieces of information:
    1.  **API Key:** Found in your WandB account settings.
    2.  **Entity:** This is typically your WandB username or the name of the organization/team you're working under.
    3.  **Project Name:** You can decide on a project name (e.g., "marin-tpu-experiments") where your runs will be logged. This project will be created in WandB if it doesn't exist.

> These values (`WANDB_API_KEY`, `WANDB_ENTITY`, `WANDB_PROJECT`) will be configured in the `submodules/levanter/.levanter.yaml` file later in this guide.

Author: ```suggestion
These values (`WANDB_API_KEY`, `WANDB_ENTITY`, `WANDB_PROJECT`) will be configured in the `.levanter.yaml` file later in this guide.
```

## Hugging Face Token (Optional but Recommended)

A Hugging Face token allows you to download models and datasets that might be gated or private. Even for public resources, using a token can prevent rate-limiting issues.

*   **Get your Token:** You can find or create a Hugging Face token in your account settings: [https://huggingface.co/settings/tokens](https://huggingface.co/settings/tokens). A "read" token is usually sufficient.

> This token (`HF_TOKEN`) will also be configured in the `submodules/levanter/.levanter.yaml` file.

Author: ```suggestion
This token (`HF_TOKEN`) will also be configured in the `.levanter.yaml` file.
```

## Google Cloud SDK Installation and Configuration

The Google Cloud SDK (`gcloud`) is necessary for interacting with Google Cloud Platform services, including TPUs.

*   **Install Google Cloud SDK:** Follow the quickstart guide: [https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/quickstarts](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/quickstarts)

After installation, configure `gcloud` with the following commands. These are typically run on your local development machine, not the TPU VM itself.

```bash
gcloud auth login
gcloud auth application-default login
gcloud components install alpha  # May be needed for the latest TPU types
gcloud services enable tpu.googleapis.com # Enable the TPU API
gcloud config set account YOUR_EMAIL_ACCOUNT # e.g., user@example.com
gcloud config set project YOUR_PROJECT_ID   # Your GCP Project ID
```

*   **SSH Key Setup for GCP:** You will also need to set up SSH keys to connect to your GCP resources. Follow Google's guide for adding SSH keys: [https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/connect/add-ssh-keys#metadata](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/connect/add-ssh-keys#metadata).

> # Levanter Configuration (`submodules/levanter/.levanter.yaml`)

Author: ```suggestion
# Levanter Configuration (`.levanter.yaml`)
```

> Levanter's `launch.py` script (located at `submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py`) requires a configuration file named `.levanter.yaml` to function. This file **must be placed in the root of your Levanter clone directory** (i.e., `submodules/levanter/.levanter.yaml`). When you run `python submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py ...` from your Marin project root, `launch.py` will look for this YAML file in its own directory's parent (`submodules/levanter/`).

Author: ```suggestion
Levanter's `launch.py` script (located at `submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py`) requires a configuration file named `.levanter.yaml` to function. This file **must be placed in root of your Marin repo**. When you run `python submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py ...` from your Marin project root, `launch.py` will look for this YAML file in the current working directory.
```

> This tutorial focuses on the environment variables essential for Marin. For a comprehensive guide to all `.levanter.yaml` options (like `zone`, `tpu` name, `capacity_type`, Docker settings, etc.), please refer to **Levanter's official documentation:** [https://levanter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Getting-Started-TPU-VM/](https://levanter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Getting-Started-TPU-VM/).

Author: ```suggestion
This tutorial focuses on the environment variables essential for Marin. For a comprehensive guide to all `.levanter.yaml` options (like `zone`, `tpu` name, `capacity_type`, Docker settings, etc.), please refer to [Levanter's official documentation](https://levanter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Getting-Started-TPU-VM/).
```

> Here's a minimal example of `submodules/levanter/.levanter.yaml` highlighting Marin-relevant settings:

Author: ```suggestion
Here's a minimal example of `.levanter.yaml` highlighting Marin-relevant settings:
```

```yaml
# .levanter.yaml (place in the root of your Levanter clone, typically submodules/levanter/)
# Refer to Levanter's official docs for all options: https://levanter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Getting-Started-TPU-VM/

env:
    # Marin-specific: Path for experiment outputs
    MARIN_PREFIX: gs://YOUR_GCS_BUCKET_NAME/marin_outputs # IMPORTANT: Set this to your GCS bucket and desired output path.

> 
>     # Marin-specific: Ensures Levanter source code is found by Python.
>     # This path is relative to the Levanter directory where this .levanter.yaml file resides.
>     PYTHONPATH: "./src:${PYTHONPATH}" 
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

    # For WandB logging (replace with your actual credentials)
    WANDB_API_KEY: YOUR_WANDB_API_KEY
    WANDB_ENTITY: YOUR_WANDB_ENTITY    # Your W&B username or organization
    WANDB_PROJECT: YOUR_WANDB_PROJECT_NAME # Your W&B project name

    # For Hugging Face model/tokenizer downloads (replace with your token if needed)
    HF_TOKEN: YOUR_HUGGINGFACE_TOKEN

    # Optional: Levanter/TPU specific performance arguments. 
    # These are advanced settings, often tuned for specific models or TPU hardware.
    # For recommended defaults used in some Marin setups, you can inspect marin/run/vars.py.
    # launch.py may not strictly require these if Levanter's defaults are sufficient for your use case.
    # LIBTPU_INIT_ARGS: >-
    #   --xla_tpu_scoped_vmem_limit_kib=81920
    #   ... (and other args from marin/run/vars.py if needed)

# Levanter-specific: TPU configuration (required by launch.py)

> # These must be set according to your GCP project and TPU details.

Author: ```suggestion
# These should be set according to your GCP project and TPU details.
```

# See Levanter docs for more details: https://levanter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Getting-Started-TPU-VM/

> zone: YOUR_ZONE # e.g., us-central2-b

Author: ```suggestion
# You can instead pass these as command line args to launch.py
zone: YOUR_ZONE # e.g., us-central2-b
```

tpu: YOUR_TPU_NAME  # e.g., my-v4-8-tpu

# Other Levanter configurations (refer to Levanter docs):
# capacity_type: "on-demand" # or "reserved", "preemptible"
# docker_repository: ... # etc.
# image_name: ...
# subnetwork: ...
```

### Key Marin-Relevant Configuration Fields:

*   **`env`**: Defines environment variables for the TPU execution environment.
    *   `MARIN_PREFIX`: **Essential for Marin.** Specifies the base GCS path for all Marin experiment outputs (checkpoints, logs, tokenized data). **Replace `gs://YOUR_GCS_BUCKET_NAME/marin_outputs` with your actual GCS bucket and desired path.**

>     *   `PYTHONPATH: "./src:${PYTHONPATH}"`: **Crucial for Levanter.** This path is relative to the `submodules/levanter/` directory (where `.levanter.yaml` resides) and ensures that Python within the Docker container can find the Levanter library code located in `submodules/levanter/src/`.

Author: ```suggestion
```

    *   `WANDB_API_KEY`, `WANDB_ENTITY`, `WANDB_PROJECT`: Your Weights & Biases credentials. Necessary if you intend to use W&B logging with Marin.
    *   `HF_TOKEN`: Your Hugging Face token. Required if your Marin experiments need to download private models or tokenizers from Hugging Face Hub.
    *   `LIBTPU_INIT_ARGS`: (Commented out by default in this minimal example) These are advanced XLA flags for fine-tuning TPU performance and stability. While Levanter might have its own defaults, Marin sometimes uses a specific set of these arguments for larger-scale runs. If you encounter issues or are scaling up, you might refer to `marin/run/vars.py` for a list of recommended arguments. For basic tutorial steps, they are often not strictly necessary.

> *   **`zone` & `tpu`**: **Essential for Levanter `launch.py`.** These specify your GCP zone and the name of your TPU instance. **Replace `YOUR_ZONE` and `YOUR_TPU_NAME` with your details.**

Author: ```suggestion
```

Ensure you create this `.levanter.yaml` file in `submodules/levanter/.levanter.yaml` and populate it with your specific details before proceeding.

# Using `launch.py` for Single TPU Nodes

The `launch.py` script, located in `submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py` (relative to your Marin project root), is the primary tool for deploying and running your Marin code on TPUs. It handles packaging your Marin project (including the Levanter submodule) into a Docker image, deploying it to the TPU, and executing your specified command.

## Basic Usage

The fundamental command structure for `launch.py` (run from the root of your Marin project directory) is:

```bash
python submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py -- YOUR_COMMAND_TO_RUN_ON_TPU
```

Key things to note:

*   **Path to `launch.py`:** The script is now at `submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py`.

> *   **`--` Separator:** This is crucial. It separates the arguments for `launch.py` itself from the command that will be executed on the TPU VM.

Author: ```suggestion
*   **`--` Separator:** It separates the arguments for `launch.py` itself from the command that will be executed on the TPU VM.
```

*   **Command Execution Context:** `YOUR_COMMAND_TO_RUN_ON_TPU` is executed from the root of your Marin project directory *on the TPU VM*. `launch.py` sets up the Docker container so that the working directory is the root of your project.
*   **Docker Packaging:** `launch.py` packages the current state of your Marin project directory (including the Levanter submodule, respecting any patterns in your `.dockerignore` files at both Marin root and Levanter submodule root) into a Docker image.

## Running a Marin Experiment Script

> With your `.levanter.yaml` configured for your TPU environment, you can now use `launch.py` to execute your Marin experiment scripts on the TPU. The Marin script itself, like the `train_tiny_model_tpu.py` example we created, defines the model, data, and training parameters, including the `TpuPodConfig` which specifies the TPU resources Marin expects.

Author: ```suggestion
With your `.levanter.yaml` configured for your TPU environment, you can now use `launch.py` to execute your Marin experiment scripts on the TPU. The Marin script itself, like the [`train_tiny_model_tpu.py` example](https://github.com/marin-community/marin/tree/main/experiments/tutorials/train_tiny_model_tpu.py) defines the model, data, and training parameters, including the `TpuPodConfig` which specifies the TPU resources Marin expects.

**You will need to update the TpuPodConfig to use the kind of TPU you are using.**

```

Here's how to run the `train_tiny_model_tpu.py` script (assuming your Marin project root is the current directory):

```bash

> # Ensure your submodules/levanter/.levanter.yaml is configured with your TPU details 

Author: ```suggestion
# Ensure you .levanter.yaml is configured with your TPU details 
```

# (YOUR_TPU_NAME, YOUR_ZONE) and, most importantly, your MARIN_PREFIX 
# (e.g., MARIN_PREFIX: gs://YOUR_GCS_BUCKET_NAME/marin_outputs).

python submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py -- \

>   python experiments/tutorials/train_tiny_model_tpu.py

Author: ```suggestion
  python experiments/tutorials/train_tiny_model_tpu.py
  
  # or
  
  python submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py --zone us-central2-b --tpu_type v4-8 --tpu_name marin_tutorial --preemptible -- python experiments/tutorials/train_tiny_model_tpu.py
```

**Explanation:**

*   `python submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py --`: Invokes Levanter's launch script.
*   `python experiments/tutorials/train_tiny_model_tpu.py`: The Marin script to execute on the TPU.
*   **Output Path Management with `MARIN_PREFIX`**:
    *   The `MARIN_PREFIX` environment variable, which you defined in `submodules/levanter/.levanter.yaml` (e.g., `gs://YOUR_GCS_BUCKET_NAME/marin_outputs`), is automatically picked up by Marin's execution logic within the `train_tiny_model_tpu.py` script (and other Marin experiment scripts).
    *   Marin uses this `MARIN_PREFIX` as the base directory in Google Cloud Storage for all outputs related to your experiments.
    *   The script itself (e.g., `train_tiny_model_tpu.py` which defines the `nano_wikitext_model` step) will then create a specific subdirectory structure under this `MARIN_PREFIX`. For example, checkpoints for the `nano_wikitext_model` might be saved to something like `gs://YOUR_GCS_BUCKET_NAME/marin_outputs/checkpoints/llama-nano-wikitext-VERSION_HASH/`. The exact naming and structure (like including `checkpoints/` and the step name with a version hash) are handled by Marin's internal step and executor logic.

>     *   You no longer need to pass a `--prefix` argument directly in the `launch.py` command for basic output location if `MARIN_PREFIX` is correctly set in `.levanter.yaml`. Your Marin script will use the `name` argument from its `Step` definitions (e.g., `name="llama-nano-wikitext"` in `train_tiny_model_tpu.py`) to create unique output paths under `MARIN_PREFIX`.

Author: ```suggestion
    *   You don't need to pass a `--prefix` argument directly in the `launch.py` command for basic output location if `MARIN_PREFIX` is correctly set in `.levanter.yaml`. Your Marin script will use the `name` argument from its `Step` definitions (e.g., `name="llama-nano-wikitext"` in `train_tiny_model_tpu.py`) to create unique output paths under `MARIN_PREFIX`.
```

*   **`--retries=N`**:
    This option allows `launch.py` to automatically attempt to restart your job up to `N` times if it fails. This can be helpful for preemptible TPUs or if transient network issues occur.

**Example combining these flags with the Marin script:**

```bash
# Ensure submodules/levanter/.levanter.yaml is configured with MARIN_PREFIX and your TPU details.
python submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py --foreground --retries=3 -- \
  python experiments/tutorials/train_tiny_model_tpu.py
```

## A Note on Docker Context and Code Availability

When you run `python submodules/levanter/infra/launch.py ...` from your Marin project root:

*   `launch.py` (from the Levanter submodule) uses the **Marin project root** as the primary Docker build context.
*   All files in your Marin project, including the `submodules/levanter/` directory, are included in the Docker image.
*   A `.dockerignore` file in your Marin project root is respected for the primary context. Levanter also has its own `.dockerignore` (e.g., `submodules/levanter/.dockerignore`) for the submodule directory.

> This setup is standard for Marin development. The `PYTHONPATH` setting in `submodules/levanter/.levanter.yaml` ensures that Levanter's source code is correctly imported within the container.

Author: ```suggestion
This setup is standard for Marin development.
```

        ```bash
        sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
        ```
    *   You'll need to restart your shell session or log out and log back in for this change to take effect.

*   **Docker GCR/Artifact Registry Authentication Issues (e.g., `denied: Unauthenticated request`)**:
    *   If using Google Container Registry (GCR) or Artifact Registry for Docker images (specified in `submodules/levanter/.levanter.yaml`) and encountering authentication errors when `launch.py` tries to pull/push images, configure Docker to use `gcloud` as a credential helper on your local machine:
        ```bash
        # For Artifact Registry (replace YOUR_REGION, e.g., us-central1)
        gcloud auth configure-docker YOUR_REGION-docker.pkg.dev

        # For GCR (less common now, but if used)
        # gcloud auth configure-docker gcr.io
        ```

This concludes the tutorial on running Marin experiments on a single TPU node using Levanter. For more advanced topics, refer to other Marin and Levanter documentation. Happy training!

# Next Steps

Congratulations on successfully setting up and running a Marin experiment on a single TPU node! Here are a few suggestions for what you can explore next:

> *   **Experiment Further with Marin:**
>     *   Try running other Marin experiments located in the `experiments/` directory to see different models and configurations in action.
>     *   Consider how you might adapt the `experiments/tutorials/train_tiny_model_tpu.py` script for your own custom models or datasets. This is a great way to start your own research.
> 
> *   **Deepen Your Levanter Knowledge:**
>     *   Explore [Levanter's documentation](https://levanter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for more advanced usage of `launch.py`, understanding different TPU configurations, and learning about Levanter's capabilities for distributed training.
> 
> *   **Explore More Marin Tutorials:**
>     *   Dive into other Marin tutorials to learn about different aspects of the platform. For example:
>         *   [Training an LM (`tutorials/train-an-lm.md`)] (train-an-lm.md) for a more in-depth look at training language models.
>         *   [Your First Marin Experiment (`tutorials/first-experiment.md`)] (first-experiment.md) for a general introduction to Marin's workflow if you haven't seen it yet.
>         *   Browse the "Tutorials" section in the navigation for other topics that might interest you.
> 
> We encourage you to continue experimenting and learning. The combination of Marin and Levanter provides a powerful platform for your research and development.

Author: ```suggestion
## Next Steps

Congratulations! You have trained your first model in Marin.  Choose your next adventure:

- Train a real [1B or 8B parameter language model](train-an-lm.md) using Marin.
- Learn about the [Executor framework](../explanations/executor.md).
- Read more about the full [language modeling pipeline](../explanations/lm-pipeline.md), including data processing.
```
